(pulsing music)
- [Voiceover] Modern
cuisines are the products
of endless
reinventions, fusions,
and explorations
of possibilities,
of traditional dishes
from varying cultures
and periods in history.
These traditional dishes are
primarily made from grains.
One ancient grain
that remains relevant
up to this day is bulgur.
Bulgur is called by many names
depending on the
country of your origin.
In Turkey it's
known as "bulgar",
"burgal, or "burghoul".
In Saudi Arabia it's
"burghul" or "borgal".
In Greece it's "pourgouri".
And in the Bible
it's called "arisah".
But like how a rose by any
other name would smell as sweet,
bulgur by any other
name would be as great.
Bulgur is made from
different groats or berries
of several species of wheat.
But it's typically made from
the specie called durum,
scientific name Triticum durum.
Durum is believed to be a
result of artificial breeding
of another ancient
domesticated specie of wheat
called emmer, grown
in Central Europe
and in the Near East in 7000 BC.
There were
archaeological findings
indicating that the
immediate regions
surrounding the Tigris
and Euphrates Rivers
were the first places to
process durum wheat into bulgur.
In Latin, "durum" means "hard",
which is appropriate
because it is the hardest,
and one of the widely
produced species
of wheat in the world.
What differentiates bulgur
from other wheat species?
Bulgur is already cooked.
Wheat kernels are
soaked, boiled, dried,
and then cracked to make bulgur.
Some actually say
that it is the world's
first processed food,
because this method
of preparing bulgur
is believed to have originated
in the Mediterranean region
during the early times.
There are also claims
that early Arab,
Israeli,
Egyptian,
and Roman civilizations
were already eating
dried cooked bulgur
around 1000 BC.
The Bible also has indications
of ancient Babylonians,
Hittites, and Hebrews
preparing bulgur
4000 years ago.
Three basic steps to
follow in making bulgur.
Number one, clean and then soak
the wheat kernels in water,
followed by exposing them to
heat to dissolve the starch.
Number two, dry
the grains and then
slightly moisten them
to remove the bran.
Dry again before cleaning
them by winnowing.
And number three, grind
and sieve the grains
into three or four grades.
Coarse, fine, and very fine.
Coarse bulgur is
usually used as stuffing
for casseroles, pilafs,
soups, and salads.
Fine bulgur is the
all-purpose grade,
used in salads, stews, soups,
mulit-grain baked goods,
and used as a protein substitute
for foods like meatless burgers.
It's widely used in popular
Middle Eastern dishes
such as tabbouleh and kibbeh.
Very fine bulgur is made
into breakfast cereals,
breads, and used as
a rice substitute.
Because the grain's
starch is gelatinized
and the kernels are
semi-cooked during the process,
bulgur gets a longer shelf
life compared to other wheat,
specially in hot and
humid environments.
Bulgur remains to
be a staple grain
in many parts of the Middle East
like Turkey, Syria, Jordan,
Lebanon, and Egypt.
Grains from early
times, like bulgur,
will continue to prove
that its ancient properties
can easily pick up on
modern culinary techniques
and provide modern man with
new and exciting dishes.
Cereal grains are
characterized by
significant amounts of protein,
carbohydrates, and fiber.
These nutrients remain essential
for man to attain and
maintain optimum health.
Bulgur is practically a
product of processed wheat.
That's why they share a
similar nutrient profile.
100g of cooked bulgur
contains the following
nutrients, vitamins,
and minerals.
Carbohydrates, 18.6g.
Protein, 3.1g.
Dietary fiber, 4.5g.
Vitamin B6, 0.08mg.
Folate, 18 micrograms.
Pantothenic acid, 0.34mg.
Calcium, 10mg.
Iron, 0.96mg.
Magnesium, 32mg.
Phosphorus, 40mg.
Sodium, 5mg.
Manganese, 0.61mg.
And zinc, 0.57mg.
Bulgur's fiber is comparable
to that of whole wheat's.
It aids in flushing toxins
out of the digestive system,
thus preventing the development
of cancerous particles.
It can also effectively
aid in weight loss.
100g of cooked bulgur
only has 83 calories
and it can easily make
someone feel full,
thus curbing cravings
and preventing
excessive food intake.
Bulgur consumption
also boosts metabolism,
immunity, and overall
physical vitality.
Because of its iron content,
the body is able to produce
adequate levels of hemoglobin
to efficiently transport
oxygen throughout the body
for faster conversion
of foods into the energy
the body needs to perform
physical activities.
The interaction between
the calcium, manganese,
and phosphorus in bulgur
leads to healthier
tissues and bones.
Calcium also aids in
regulating blood pressure,
specially in men.
And in women, high calcium
intake helps relieve
symptoms of
pre-menstrual syndrome
such as mood, behavior,
pain, and water retention.
Bulgur's vitamin
B composition, B6,
pantothenic acid or B5,
and folate or B9,
does not only benefit
a regular person's
metabolic process,
it can also supplement
a pregnant woman's
folic acid levels.
In some countries where
rice is a staple food,
many are starting to
shift from white rice
to either red or brown
rice for health reasons.
Bulgur is a great
alternative to brown rice.
Actually, its nutrient profile
reads better than brown rice.
Here's how one cup of bulgur
fares against one
cup of brown rice.
Brown rice has 216 calories,
while bulgur only has 151.
Brown rice has 1.8g of fat,
while bulgur only has 0.44.
Brown rice has 3.5g of fiber,
while bulgur has 8.21.
Brown rice has 7.8
micrograms of folate,
while bulgur has 32.8.
Wheat and rice are undeniably
more popular than bulgur.
But as an even better
alternative to brown rice,
there's a huge
possibility that bulgur
can attract a niche in
a rice-dominated market.
One thing that
grains such as wheat,
quinoa,
maize,
bulgur,
and others have in common
is the equal opportunity
to stand witness
as man makes history,
good and bad.
As far as 300 years ago,
bulgur was already a
part of man's economy.
Manuscripts from an
Assyrian monastery
Mor Mattai in Iraq
cited a few references on bulgur
being used as a form
of money by the monks.
The monks grew their own wheat
in the lands owned
by the monastery,
and they processed
their own bulgur.
That's why they would have
stocks in large quantities.
Plus, monasteries that
time were also used
as inns and refuge,
so the monks also served
their guests with meals
made from bulgur.
Before the 19th century,
bulgur was primarily homemade
in quantities enough
to feed a family.
But World War I
necessitated the industrial
and commercial
production of bulgur.
A province in Antolia
called Karaman
produced bulgur that
was used as food rations
for the Ottoman army.
Many believe that bulgur
was brought to France
by the survivors of
the Armenian genocide.
French cuisine was
foreign to them,
so even in exile they continued
to prepare and eat bulgur,
alleviating their
homesickness as well.
Later on the French were
introduced to bulgur,
and it was eventually
incorporated into their diet.
Today in the postwar era,
adding to bulgur's role
in the Armenian cuisine
is its symbolic participation
in an Armenian ceremony
called "madagh",
a requiem service
conducted to commemorate
and remember the victims
of the Armenian genocide.
During the annual ceremony,
families and descendants
of the victims
would come together and
make food offerings,
which always include lamb stew
with pilaf made from bulgur.
Madagh is still popular
among Armenian communities
in New York, Wisconsin,
and Illinois.
Turkey produces approximately
one million tons
of bulgur every year, which
is why the Turkish people
were never forced to
stop making one of their
oldest fermented
drinks called "boza",
made from bulgur, water, sugar,
roasted chickpeas, and cinnamon.
It's commonly drunk
during winter.
In the 17th century
alcohol, including boza,
was banned by Sultan Mehmed IV
and it was only in
the 19th century
when a non-alcoholic
version from Albania
revived boza's popularity.
This non-alcoholic version
continues to be sold
in Turkey as well as
in Bosnia, Bulgaria,
Kazakhstan,
Kyrgystan, Lithuania,
Macedonia, Poland, and Ukraine.
It is said that in order
for man to move forward
he must look at his
past and learn from it.
The benefits and uses of bulgur
are something man
should take with him
as he journeys
towards the future.
In World War I bulgur
was mass-produced
to feed the soldiers
of the Ottoman army.
Then in World War II, aside
from being a food ration,
bulgur was also used
as a blasting agent
to clean airplane parts due
to its exfoliating properties.
Today and in other countries,
bulgur is more than
just a food ration.
It's made and used
in pilafs, soups,
baked goods, or as stuffing.
"Dahlia", or what bulgur
is called in India,
is eaten as a cereal
with milk and sugar
and is typically given
to recuperating people.
Since bulgur and
pasta both come from
the processed
wheat specie durum,
bulgur is a popular
pasta substitute
in the United States.
Today Turkey is the
largest producer
and exporter of
bulgur in the world,
with 91,940 tons in 2008.
Bulgur has come a long way,
from being processed in
small households in the past,
into state of the art
facilities today in Turkey.
When people from the Middle East
migrated to the United
States, so did bulgur.
And so research was
done to determine
the nutritional
value of the grain.
Eventually it was
recognized as a whole grain
by the United States
Department of Agriculture,
or USDA, and the
Whole Grains Council.
Bulgur found its place and role
in the modern world in 1965,
when it became an official
emergency food contingency
in fallout shelters by the USDA.
Also because of bulgur's
excellent nutrient profile,
it became a part of the
Food for Peace program
of the United States Agency
for International Development,
or USAID.
Based on USAID's
programming guidelines,
bulgur can be served in
areas where wheat is staple,
such as the Middle
East and Asia,
during both emergency
and development settings.
The USAID fortified bulgur
living micronutrient premix
containing iron, zinc,
and vitamins A, B1, B2,
B3, B6, B9,
B12, and D3,
resulting in a more ideal
food ration package,
specially during calamity
relief operations.
Here's a comparison
of nutrients,
minerals, and vitamins
between 100g of regular bulgur
and 100g of USAID's
fortified bulgur.
Regular bulgur has
18.6g carbohydrates,
3.1g protein,
4.5g dietary fiber,
32mg magnesium,
40mg phosphorus,
5mg sodium,
0.57mg zinc,
0.08mg vitamin B6,
and 18 micrograms folate.
Now the fortified bulgur
premix of the USAID.
It has 75.87g carbohydrates,
12.29g protein,
18.3g dietary fiber,
164mg magnesium,
300mg phosphorus,
17mg sodium,
4.33mg zinc,
0.74 vitamin B6,
and 181 micrograms of folate.
The fact that bulgur is
chosen as a perfect food
to nourish people during times
when their nutrition
is highly compromised
only attests to this
grain's already inherent
exceptional
properties and value.
Through fortification efforts,
it will not be surprising
if bulgur surpasses
the superfood level
and starts a totally new
and more superior food category.
Most bulgur today,
specially the kind
that is exported
around the world,
is processed using
modern facilities.
But the ancient method lives on
in some small villages
in Eastern Mediterranean.
Since bulgur is already
partially cooked,
it enjoys a longer shelf life
and preparation is much simpler
compared to other grains.
It's like instant cereal,
because you can just
pour boiling water,
soak it for 30 to 40 minutes,
drain it, and then voilà.
You now have a bulgur pilaf.
Bulgur absorbs water, expands,
and doubles, even
triples in volume
so make sure you use big pots.
Here are some recipe
ideas for you to try.
Vegan bulgur pilaf
with mushrooms.
For this recipe you will need
one and one half cups
of uncooked bulgur,
three cups of water,
three tablespoons of
butter or vegan margarine,
two cups sliced mushrooms,
one bunch of chopped
green onions,
one medium chopped
red bell pepper,
two tablespoons of lime juice,
three tablespoons
of dry white wine,
one quarter cup of
chopped fresh parsley,
one tablespoon of dried basil,
and one teaspoon each
of salt and pepper.
Start by cooking the
bulgur in a pot of water
for five minutes.
Remove the pot from the heat,
but let it stand for
five more minutes
so the bulgur can start
absorbing water, then drain.
In a large skillet
over medium heat
melt the butter and
sauté the mushrooms,
onions, and peppers.
Once the onions are translucent,
remove the skillet
from the heat.
Then add the lemon
juice, wine, parsley,
basil, salt, and pepper.
Mix with bulgur and serve.
Another must-try recipe
is sprouts and
bulgur sandwiches.
Prepare the following.
One half cup of fine bulgur,
one cup of water,
226.8g low fat yogurt,
one quarter of a cup of
fat-free salad dressing,
one and one half
teaspoons of curry powder,
one cup of shredded carrots,
one half cup of chopped apple,
one third cup of
coarsely chopped peanuts,
two cups of fresh bean sprouts,
and eight very thin slices
of toasted wheat bread.
First, thoroughly rinse
bulgur under cold water,
then stir in the bulgur in a pot
of one cup of boiling water.
Remove from heat.
Let it stand uncovered
for 20 minutes,
before draining and
squeezing excess water.
Second, in a bowl combine
yogurt, salad dressing,
or mayonnaise and curry powder.
Stir until everything
is evenly incorporated.
Third, put the bulgur, carrots,
apple and peanuts in
the yogurt mixture.
Mix, cover, and then
refrigerate until serving time.
To serve, divide and
arrange the sprouts
on four wheat toasts.
Scoop and spread bulgur mixture,
and then top with the
rest of the wheat toasts.
You can still enjoy bulgur using
traditional tabbouleh recipes.
But in today's evolving cuisines
and growing anticipation
for new food ideas,
utilizing bulgur in your
gastronomic adventures
is truly a must.
(pulsing music)